---
title: Tentales
type: Collection of literary flash fiction pieces
desc: The first stories I wrote. The main chunk of work happened during the first COVID-19 lockdown in spring 2020. I would get bored rather quickly with a story, so the idea was to keep them short.
date:
  started: February 4, 2020
  finished: June 14, 2020
---

```toc
```

## John's beautiful car

John had a beautiful car. The car was indeed very well made for a toy. It
was red, with shiny bumpers and wheel disks. It had doors you could open.
Just like in a real car! Even though John had many more toys, for him they
were only nice-to-have additions. The beautiful red car was the center of
his collection, and, in a way, the center of his universe.

Martin was John's best friend. Naturally, Martin also wanted to play with
the beautiful red car, but it was impossible for John to share it. The car
was too precious to him. “After all, Martin is not as careful with his toys
as I am,” thought John, “he might break or scratch it, and what would I do
then? The car just won't be as good!”

Time passed and John got a present—a tank. It was also very well made and
had many moving parts. Needless to say, a tank is better than a car, because
it can do more damage in a battle. The tank became John's new favorite. Even
so, the red car was still too good to share. John now had the pride of a
collector: he enjoyed not so much playing with the toys as the fact that he
had such beautiful items in his possession. Giving them to someone else?
They cannot be endangered like that. It is not like John was a particularly
greedy little boy; he simply had a system of values.

School started and there was a change. At first, John did not know what it
was, but his confidence and pride started to wane. He soon discovered that
the reason for that was his classmate—Kate. Kate was a girl with a loud,
low, yet kind voice. She had black hair and was bold in everything she did.
She even pestered boys in the class. Her lower lip protruded just a little
bit more than her upper lip. It often happens with people that their
appearance matches their character.

Now the center of John's universe was Kate. What a change! For the first
time, it was not a result of human work, but a person. Life presented a
bitter realization: Kate was precious and important, but not at all in his
collection. Oh, he would like that a lot. With her, he would share all his
toys and more, only to lure her closer and put her next to the car and the
tank.

The new center of the universe was a tricky one. Unlike with toys, John had
no say in what Kate did and she never asked his opinion. In fact, she did
not care much about him at all. To rectify the situation John decided to
bring his best toys to the class and share them with Kate. This would surely
win her over. The plan was implemented, but Kate did not spend more than
five minutes with either the car or tank; she was a girl with her own system
of values.

The world will never look the same. What was reliable, secure, and under
control, now is uncertain. Where is the center of the universe? What good
are the red car and the tank, when Kate doesn't care about them?

For the first time in his life, John let everyone play with his best toys.

## The cat speaks up

Kris has not been feeling well for a week now. Usually curious and playful,
these days the cat just lies on the chair in the corner of the living room
all day and sleeps. Of course, he was taken to the clinic immediately when
this started (and again more recently) but the veterinarians could not find
anything.

His human, Rosa, is very concerned. For one, it is the first time this has
happens to Kris, and he is not old yet. Another reason is that Rosa is very
attached to Kris, as he is literally the only soul she shares her life with.
She cared about this cat since he was just a little kitty and did everything
to make him happy.

No improvement today. As usual, Rosa checks on Kris only to find him in the
same pitiful state. It is late evening and she is tired, having worked all
day. She lies on her bed and quickly falls asleep.

Rosa has seen Kris in her dreams before; this time, however, is different,
because Kris can speak. Quite a development, although it does not surprise
Rosa in her sleep.

“You know Rosa, I'm dying,” says Kris in a jaded voice.

“But why? You have everything: the best food, toys, all my love!” replies
Rosa, scared of the fact that things are indeed so bad for Kris, and at the
same time happy to be able to learn what is wrong with her cat from the cat
himself.

“I know, Rosa, and yet, I'm dying.”

“Do you know why?”

“I feel like I'm not living my life to the fullest,” answers Kris, and
lights a cigarette.

“Huh, what is missing in your life?”

“Well, first of all, I'm always in this very limited space and I would like
to see a bigger world. I would like to catch mice. And I would like to have
sex.”

“But how? Kris, you know you have been sterilized!”

“That's the tragedy of my life. I did not want that, yet you did this to me.
You claim to love me, Rosa, yet you did this violence without ever asking
me. And now the more I think about it, the more I come to the conclusion
that you do not love me.”

“What are you talking about, I love you more than anyone else on the earth!”

Rosa is about to start crying.

“Well, maybe you just want to be loved?” The cat's brows go up in a fake
amusement. “Unconditionally and sincerely, every evening when you return
from work. Loved by someone totally dependent on you, by someone who will be
infinitely thankful just because you give him food every day? What other
choice do I have, after all? I'm a prisoner. There is no one else to love in
the flat.”

Kris finishes the sentence and blows a big cloud of smoke in Rosa's face.

“I can't believe you're saying these things, Kris! I cared for you since you
were just a little kitty!” cries Rosa and shows with her hands the
approximate size of Kris when he was a kitty.

“Look, Rosa. Do you really love me for what I'm? And what am I? I'm a dying
sterilized cat now, and I'm not even old.”

Rosa wakes up and realizes that this was just a ridiculous nightmare. A
particularly ridiculous nightmare. She quickly checks on Kris and, of
course, he is sleeping on the chair as usual—no cigarette, no ambitions.

The next day Rosa goes to look for a new cat.

## The photographer

Photography is Frank's passion. He shoots film, and not the usual
thirty-five millimeter film, but medium format film—square frames six by six
centimeters. He does this with a camera from another time: a fully
mechanical machine, once famous for its technical qualities, but now mostly
forgotten except among enthusiasts.

Shooting with this camera truly takes skill. There are no electronics to
hold your hand. One needs to use an external light meter and set the
aperture and exposure accordingly. When the shutter release button is
pressed the camera produces a gorgeous snap. The film is then advanced by
rotating a winding crank. Even now, when the camera is not produced anymore,
it costs more than most professional digital cameras. Back in the day, it
cost a fortune.

Once the pictures are taken, the film needs to be developed. Frank does it
at home and has a little lab for that purpose. Even though development takes
time, he likes the process. “It's a nice analog kinda thing to do,” he says.

Frank is into street photography. He enjoys capturing elusive moments of
everyday life. Today is no exception. After spending three hours hunting, he
finally frames the perfect shot, presses the button… but nothing happens.
Frank's camera has some problems recently. Sometimes the shutter doesn't
work. Many times he considered switching to a modern camera, perhaps even a
digital one, but it is not the same thing. Any fool can use a modern camera.
With his old camera, there is a mystery in the process. There is craft. The
results have a unique look, too. Normal people wouldn't know the difference,
but to the geeks it is there.

Frustrated about the missed shot, Frank returns home.

He is welcomed by his wife Tonia. Tonia is an Arab woman with big eyes full
of oriental magic. This is perhaps the only thing that makes her attractive
though, she is not particularly beautiful.

“Oh, you're messing with your camera again, what a waste of time!” she
complains. “Hold on, I wanna ask you something,” continues Tonia heading to
the balcony to smoke a cigarette. A minute later she is back.

As she sits before Frank, she involuntarily performs one of those tasteless
gestures he normally cannot stand. If it were done by someone else, he would
probably roll his eyes, but Tonia has a sanction to make this sort of a
gesture. When *she* does it, it is charming.

“Will we go out tonight?” she asks.

Frank is tired, he would rather stay home. But he looks at Tonia and sees a
sparkle of life itself. He cannot be boring tonight, she deserves better. He
reaches Tonia's foot and kisses it. “We'll go anywhere you want,” is his
reply.

## The medallion

Rebecca had a medallion. She got it from her mother, and her mother, in
turn, got it from the grandma. Rebecca liked the medallion and sometimes
wore it.

One day she attracted the attention of a very handsome man. It was clear
that the man was interested in her, for he approached her and said, “What a
beautiful medallion you've got here!” Rebecca told the man how she got the
medallion from her mother and how her mother, in turn, got it from the
grandma. The man became interested in the age of the medallion and its
value. Rebecca did not know these details, but she promised to find out. And
so, they arranged a date.

When Rebecca and the man met again, she explained that the grandma got the
medallion as a gift which makes it at least sixty years old. The man asked
if he could take a closer look at the medallion. This was a little bit too
forward, but Rebecca agreed. To her surprise, it turned out that the man
came with a magnifying glass. He began to study the medallion very carefully
as if he was hungry for it. To redirect his attention, Rebecca tried to
start a conversation several times, but the man, it seemed, was interested
only in the medallion and nothing else. Finally, frustrated, Rebecca said,
“I thought you were interested in me, but it's all about my medallion!”
Without waiting for his reply, she took the medallion from his hands and
left.

That night Rebecca stood in front of a mirror completely naked and
contemplated her medallion in the moon-light. She was young and the
medallion was flawless. She understood the interest of the man. Perhaps she
wanted too much from him from the start?

Later, Rebecca met the same man in a street. This time he was with a girl.
They looked at each other lovingly and made a beautiful couple. Rebecca felt
jealous and betrayed. She approached the couple and said sardonically, “Is
her medallion any better than mine?” The man looked surprised. “What we have
is not about medallions. I love this woman, her smile, I love what sort of a
person she is.”

Rebecca went home. In that minute she hated the medallion, for it had
attracted the wrong man. Nevertheless, Rebecca decided to wear the medallion
every day, because now she knew what sort of an appreciation certain
collectors might have for it.

## Neil

Neil was a housekeeper with the Smith family. Indeed, he had virtually
become part of the family due to the length of his employment and the
quality of his service. There were three important things in Neil's life:
the housekeeping, the garden, and his son Jimmy. Industrious and immaculate,
Neil excelled at everything he cared about. And yet there seemed to be a
sharp demarcation line between the things that interested Neil and
everything else. If someone tried to talk with him about news, politics, or
art, he would just wave his hand and say, “It's none of my business, I have
things to manage.”

Jimmy was a quiet kid about twelve years old. These days Neil would often
try to occupy him with something practical. In his youth, Neil used to carve
figures from wood and got pretty good at it. Now he taught his son the same
craft. Jimmy was not particularly enthusiastic about this idea, but he tried
to play along because it seemed so important to his father. Usually, Jimmy
would start a piece, often much larger than he could actually manage, and
try to get some details right while leaving large parts of the wood mostly
untouched.

One day Jessica—the Smiths' daughter in her early twenties—had something to
discuss with Mrs Smith.

“The garden looks a little empty, don't you think, mom?” said Jessica.

“I don't know, it looks fine to me,” replied Mrs Smith.

“It would be much better if we added some figures to it,” continued Jessica.
At that moment Neil approached and it became apparent that he was interested
in the conversation.

“Hi, Neil! How are you? Tell us your opinion: should we add some figures to
the garden to make it a bit livelier?” asked Jessica.

Neil liked when people asked his opinion regarding the things he cared
about. He nodded slightly and squinted like a cat. “I must say that I agree
with you, Miss Jessica. It needs some figures to be truly pleasing to the
eye.”

“You see mom? Neil supports my idea!” said Jessica. She wanted to continue,
but Neil wasn't done with his reply.

“After so many years as a gardener, I have an eye for things like this. The
figures should be made of wood. Carved from wood. You probably don't know
it, Miss Jessica, but I carve figures myself in the evenings and many people
say that they are very high-quality work.”

“What a wonderful idea, Neil! Do bring your figures and install them in the
garden as you see fit,” exclaimed Mrs Smith feeling that she might get
something for cheap or even for free whereas the idea of her daughter would
probably cost a fortune.

Jessica did not know what to say. Things did not turn out how she wanted,
but who knows, maybe Neil could make some decent figures after all?

Soon more and more figures started to appear in the garden. If Jessica had
not known that they were supposed to be the figures for decoration, she
would probably have asked Neil what these pieces of wood in the garden were.
Even Mrs Smith had to admit that the figures did not look very good.

“Mom, look what Neil did to our garden!” complained Jessica.

“He brought us his figures,” answered Mrs Smith, who tried to play a fool.

“They give the word ‘ugly’ a new definition, don't you see, mom?”

“Don't be so picky. Neil has worked for us for so long. He did such a
wonderful job with this garden. I'm not telling him that his figures aren't
nice. You know how sensitive he is, that would break his heart. Let's just
keep them.”

Soon Mrs Smith thanked Neil for the figures and told him that they are
indeed very high-quality work. He squinted and slowly nodded a few times.
One second more and perhaps he would actually start purring.

Soon after the installation of the figures Mark, a friend of the family,
came to visit the Smiths. When he saw the figures he said, “Those are
hideous figures, where did you get them?” At that moment Neil approached and
it became apparent that he was interested in the conversation.

“These are made by Neil, our gardener and housekeeper. He is just behind
you, Mark,” said Mrs Smith.

Mark turned around. Neil looked at him as if Mark wasn't really a person but
rather an inanimate object which, for some reason, Neil was forced to give
explanations to. “As someone who invested some effort in this, I still feel
the effort was well placed, but more than that, I reserve the right to make
things that are ‘hideous.’ If nothing you ever do seems a waste of time to
others, you aren't pushing the envelope far enough.”

Everyone was a little surprised by this answer. Mark did not want to get
into an argument over some silly figures, so he said “I didn't really mean
it. Upon closer inspection, they look like very high-quality work.”

“They do!” Neil concurred. He looked at Mark in a friendly way and started
nodding in approval. “But truth to be told, they are the works of my son,
Jimmy. He is just eight, but he learned how to carve wood on his own and
made all of them.”

“We are looking forward to getting more!” said Jessica.

## The good times are over

Jane just finished her masters in cultural science. Free as a bird, she does
this and that to pay the bills and keep her boredom in check. In her free
time, Jane investigates art and fashion. She reads about it online, visits
exhibitions and museums. She admires Bach, music on vinyl, good films, and
nature. She takes photos of almost every flower she can find.

Jane hangs out with her friends: Rachel, Nancy, and Kate. Today is no
exception. At the end of the eventful day, an exciting idea invades their
imagination. There is a low bridge that goes over a street. The bridge has a
billboard attached to it, so if one stands behind the billboard, it is
possible to be invisible to the people below while remaining directly above
them. The friends decide to use this fortunate configuration to play a game.
The game is about spitting on the people below. The best shot is when the
victim doesn't notice the spittle and it lands preferably on their head or
shoulders. The worst case is when the friends are spotted or when they miss.

Jane enjoys the game—it is good fun. Deep inside, Jane is even proud to
participate—it proves the flexibility of her character. There is freedom and
a healthy dose of mischief here. Nothing serious, and nothing is lost. She
feels way ahead of the people below.

When the friends are tired of the game, they say goodbye. In some thirty
minutes Jane is home. Inside, she takes off her jacket. As she looks at the
jacket though, she cannot believe her eyes—there are five good spits on it.
Impossible! The bemusement turns into rage. “It is them! Who else could have
done this? Why did they do this? Did they do this together or was it someone
in particular? What am I going to do about it?” Jane starts to walk in the
room. “I'm gonna kill the bitch who did this!” she says aloud. Her hands
clench. Amid all thoughts and words that pop up in her mind, one word stands
out and re-emerges again and again. The word is “disrespect.”

Jane tries to remember if there was a moment when some of the girls stood
behind her and had a chance to do a thing like this, but no such moment
comes to mind. It seems that everyone was fully consumed by the game and all
the girls were in Jane's field of view all the time. As if still not
believing it, she looks at her jacket again—the spits are there. It must be
the girls.

Jane decides to phone and question each girl individually. Unless they are
together against her, this strategy may help to uncover the truth.

She phones Rachel—who Jane considers her best friend—first.

“Hi, do you know why I'm calling you?” asks Jane drily.

“Hi, no, I don't. Something happened?” answers Rachel. She sounds perfectly
normal. Jane listens carefully—she is ready to notice any suspicious detail
of Rachel's intonation hoping to guess whether or not she is being honest
with her.

“Well, imagine what's just happened. I came home and discovered that someone
spat all over my jacket,” continues Jane.

“Wow! For real?” Rachel appears to be genuinely surprised.

“Yes. Do you know anything about this?”

“No, nothing! This is really strange. And ironic too…”

“Ironic? I'm not joking here. Someone fucking spat on me!”

“Calm down. This is not me; do you believe me?” asks Rachel.

“Yeah, I believe you,” says Jane, and she does. Rachel is Jane's best
friend, after all. They have always had good fun together and there is no
reason to suspect Rachel now. “Maybe you have an idea who might have done
it?” asks Jane after a pause.

“No, I did not see anything. Do you think it was Nancy or Kate? It's
impossible, I would have noticed…”

“Okay,” says Jane. “Do you remember if I had any spits on my jacket when I
left?”

“I can't really tell. I did not look.”

“Okay, bye.”

It must be either Nancy or Kate then. Jane phones them right away. They both
are surprised just like Rachel and do not seem to remember anything. Nancy
even claims that there were no spits on Jane's jacket when she left.

For a minute Jane is confused, she does not know what to think. There are
only two possibilities: either someone else spat on her while she was
returning home (which seems very improbable), or the three girls are
conspiring against Jane and they have lied. The conviction that Rachel told
her truth grows weaker and gives place to a new wave of suspicion.

Only now, some thirty minutes later, Jane remembers to clean her jacket.
Disrespect. How did she deserve this? Jane tries to remember if she ever had
a serious enough conflict with any of the girls, a conflict that could cause
this sort of reaction. She thinks about the things she did last week, last
month, last year. Nothing even remotely serious enough, or so it seems. And
even if there were a tension at some point, why wait for so long and pretend
to be friends only to find this occasion to play a stupid joke like this?

The lack of a good reason for what the girls did only makes Jane angrier.
She imagines how she pulls their hair. She imagines all sorts of nasty
things happening to Rachel, Nancy, and Kate. This gives her a bit of
satisfaction. Finally, it is enough for today and Jane goes to bed. She
falls asleep surprisingly quickly.

The next day Jane wakes up because of a phone call. It is Rachel.

“Hey Jane, we are planning to go to see that horror movie Nancy told you
about yesterday. We'll go to the park to have a picnic and then to the
cinema in the evening, like the good old times! Are you in?”

Jane feels a lump in her throat. “They think that it's gonna work with me
like this. That I'm a fool. They probably laughed at me behind my back
yesterday.” She knows that she will never get rid of these suspicions.
Disrespect. Suddenly, Jane wants to show that she knows what is going on and
that she is not someone they can easily trick. “The good times are over, you
bitch!” screams Jane so loudly that it surprises even herself.

## A deliberate mistake

Robert worked hard all his life. He was not the sort of person who gets
lucky and makes a breakthrough in his career. Still, Robert had perseverance
and it eventually paid off. In his mid-forties, he was in upper management
of a middle-sized, yet very successful corporation. In fact, he had lunch
with the CEO himself almost every day. Life was good.

Robert traveled during vacations and had hobbies. He had a beautiful wife
and two children. He was very fond of his wife and cared a lot about her. He
also loved his children and did his best to raise them to be happy,
intelligent, and kind.

Once during a lunch with his boss (who we will call Rick), an interesting
incident happened. A waitress was bringing a cup of coffee and almost fell.
The hot coffee flew out of the cup in the face of a customer, who screamed
in pain. Both Robert and Rick saw this and Rick remarked, “Hell, I don't
wanna even imagine that happening to me!”

“Yeah,” said Robert. For a moment he found it funny to imagine hot coffee
flying right in Rick's face. Truth to be told, he respected Rick a lot and
they were almost friends, so there was not a hint of animosity on Robert's
part. Still, there are lots of things people imagine every day without
knowing why.

“Bob, I wanna ask you to deliver the annual talk for the new employees. I
usually do this myself, but this year there is something else I need to
attend to. You know this sort of talk, try to tell them about the corporate
values and encourage the newcomers to perform. You sure can use your own
example, I think that will work great,” said Rick.

“You can count on me!” replied Robert. He liked that he was entrusted to
give the talk that the CEO usually presented himself.

The rest of the day went as usual… until bedtime. As Robert was reflecting
on things he had done today, he came across his thoughts about coffee again.
“Heh, this is really stupid that I'm thinking about this!” Yet, just for fun
he actually remembered that he had had coffee that day, and imagined that
not only some abstract coffee flies right into Rick's face but coffee from
his very own cup. One of those strange fantasies that make you smile because
of how illogical, unexpected, and overall ridiculous they are.

Hypothesizing, Robert started to think of what would happen if he really
threw his coffee in the face of his boss like this. “That would be clear
that it was on purpose, and it would be hard to explain why I did it,
impossible. Rick is not someone to fool around with, surely that would be
the end of my career.” Continuing like this, he suddenly found it
paradoxical and amusing that more than twenty years of hard work could be
canceled completely, in a most ridiculous and unthinkable way, in split
second. Laughing about the very fact that he was thinking about such absurd
things, he finally fell asleep.

On the next day, it so happened that Robert and Rick were having lunch
together again. The thought about the coffee experiments came back almost
immediately now. Not only came back but was ignited by the urge and
curiosity that artists or perhaps physicists experience when they are about
to explore uncharted territory. As if there were a unique possibility to
learn what is behind the horizon of what was thought possible or imaginable.
Without admitting it to himself, he actually wanted to throw that coffee. He
wanted to see the expression on his boss's face as it changes from normal to
what he imagined would be the face of a man tortured by a medieval
inquisitor. Confused and angry at himself, Robert spent a good part of the
lunch unwillingly rehearsing what would happen if he attacked his boss like
this.

Finally, the day came when Robert had to present the talk to the new
employees. The big auditorium held a good deal of people. “There are two
reasons why an employee does not perform. Either they can't or they won't.
We know how to deal with both problems. If an employee cannot perform, they
must be trained. For that, we provide courses and ensure that all conditions
for professional growth are met. If an employee won't perform, they simply
lack motivation. There are many ways to motivate, but nothing works better
than recognition of efforts and abilities. We take note of every your
accomplishment and promote you promptly.” At this point, Robert changed the
tone of his voice. It became more intimate as if he was speaking with close
friends and was about to make a confession. “Look at me. Today I'm one of
the key people at the company. Yet I started just ten years ago as an
ordinary manager with a boring CV. Our CEO, Rick Fatbuck noticed my
motivation early and promoted me many times. It is fair to say that he made
my career. I'm thankful to mister Fatbuck, but let's remember that
appreciation of efforts is in our best interests. This is how we grow as
professionals and as a company…” Robert talked in this manner for an hour
and his talk had an effect.

The next week Robert had another lunch with Rick.

“I was told that your talk was excellent. Thanks, Bob, year after year you
never let me down!” said Rick.

“I did my best. I had the impression that the young people in the audience
left convinced that all they need to do is to perform well, and then, in
some ten years, they will be here, eating with us,” answered Robert. He was
looking at his hot coffee and the familiar thoughts revisited him, yet he
forced himself to laugh.

“Yeah, ambition is the best way to motivate!” replied Rick. “By the way, I
noticed that you are unusually strained lately, is everything OK? How is
your wife, how are the kids?”

“They are fine, thank you! Everything is normal, but I appreciate you
asking,” replied Robert. For him, the minutes dragged on like hours. It now
felt a very real possibility that he was about to throw the coffee. The
dark, primitive, animal nature of himself embraced the little isle of
consciousness which tried its best to do the right and acceptable thing. The
pleasure behind that single movement of irrational liberation was comparable
with the strongest sexual desires. There was nothing better than that,
nothing more important than that, nothing more exciting than that ever in
his life. Throwing the coffee now seemed like an orgasmic point of cosmic
scale. Robert was visibly trembling. He knew that just one second more and
he would do it. “I need to go to the rest room,” he said looking absolutely
sick. No one at the table could understand what was going on with him.

Over the next few days every time there was a chance to be sitting at the
same table with Rick at lunch Robert would come up with an excuse to either
skip the lunch or have it somewhere else. It continued like this for a
couple of weeks.

Finally, one morning Rick invited Robert to his office. When Robert came,
two cups of excellent strong coffee were on the table. “Listen, Bob, we both
know that something is going on with you lately. You know I've been always
good to you and I want to support you now. You can be frank with me, what is
it?” Robert took the coffee and drank a little bit of it. It was so hot that
he could not drink more than the smallest sip. At that point, there was no
question anymore about what to do in the next second. It seemed that it was
meant to be like this from his very birth. Perhaps it was the only reason he
lived. He felt a weird strain in his chest and could hear the blood pumping
in his ears. Everything around him seemed unreal as if he was lethally
wounded or under some sort of a drug. His hand moved with surprising
precision and dexterity.

## In the mood for love

Sometimes you meet someone and it takes only a short time to understand that
it is your perfect partner. You call it luck, destiny, or happy coincidence.
It doesn't matter. The only thing you know is that you've found a rare
soulmate and now your days are incomparably happier than ever before.

Tonight is the first date for Boris and Dina. They hurry, almost
instinctively, to the appointed meeting place in the depths of the
never-sleeping city. Romanticized urban reality governs the evening. The
stars are cold and impartial. The neon lights are inviting and half-drunk.
The music is hiding behind each and every corner. The smell of piss is mixed
with expensive perfume. It is a night of ardor, alcohol, and revelations.
Like so many others.

Boris can almost smell Dina behind the corner. They sense each other from
far away. He meets her and notices the desire in her eyes. Her scent is
subtle but irresistible. They are in the mood for love. At the corner, there
is a machine that sells contraceptives. The attraction is so strong that
they decide to have sex right in the street. The bystanders are not
surprised.

After the eventful evening, Boris runs back home. His tongue hangs out of
his mouth in a happy way. He breaths heavily. He must be home in time,
because he has promised his human a walk under the stars, too.

## Derek's problem

It was Derek's lot to enjoy a certain incessant success with women and to
feel acutely ashamed of it. Every time he'd go out women would promptly take
notice of him and would act in the most direct manner imaginable, not far
removed from an actual assault. They'd set their craving eyes on him and try
to start a conversation. Derek, being a very shy and polite young man, could
not refuse. Similarly, when they invited him to visit their apartments, he
could never say “no.” Inside, he was well aware, after years and years of
practice, what was expected of him. Sometimes he liked the girl, but that
was rare. Nevertheless, he'd always deliver his best possible performance,
if not out of passion, then out of compassion. It is in this exact manner
Derek would inevitably have sexual intercourse with all sorts of women, most
of which he did not even like.

Derek felt shameful and tried to conceal these episodes. At the same time,
his friends constantly bragged about the modicum of lack that they had with
the opposite sex. In awkward situations like these, when Derek was expected
to say something on the subject, he'd always say that he was too occupied by
his studies and had no time for such games. His friends would laugh at him,
but what did they know? They had good careers and were well-developed
individuals. It wasn't shameful for them to seek out a bit of an adventure.
On the other hand, Derek struggled with his life. He wasn't doing great with
his career or his growth as a person. All he did was the perpetual serving
of women. He did not have any free time whatsoever for his personal life.

Sometimes Derek would stand completely naked in front of a mirror and say
“I'm just a body attached to my dick, so that women can use it.” Then, not
always, but quite often, tears would stream down his face and he would cry
“I can't take it anymore!”

Derek set a goal for himself to stop seeing women no matter what. That
wasn't easy. Quite a few times he had to say “no” very decisively with an
expression of commitment on his face, and if that wouldn't help Derek had to
fight his way out from bars and clubs.

Finally, after three days of abstinence, Derek met Lola. She was a nice but
sophisticated girl who read all sorts of books and knew so much about
everything. Derek felt that he had finally found someone who saw the human
side of him, someone special. Still, he was rather doubtful about this
affair. “She is too good for me. I'll probably do fine in bed, but how long
will we be able to sustain this relationship? I do not know any of the books
she reads, I'm completely illiterate. She has been building her inner world
for so many years while all I ever did was fucking.”

Lola started to educate Derek about all sorts of things so that he wouldn't
feel so miserable. They'd also have fantastic sex. Still, Derek was
positively uncertain about this affair. “She gives so much time to me and
all I give in return is sex. But then, that's what I have been giving to all
the other women when they showed the slightest desire for it. It turns out
that I don't treat the girl I love any differently from everyone else. Even
my love is completely mediocre.”

Derek decided to make something special for Lola and wrote a poem. In the
poem, he compared Lola with a white horse galloping through dirt and a moon
orbiting Jupiter, the biggest, yet dead and vicious planet. After the
presentation of the poem they had sex, but Derek did not enjoy sex anymore.
He was a clever guy even though he had never got a chance to put his brain
to use. He understood that his poem was lacking in depth and subtlety. He
felt that he was being exploited again like so many times before. So, he
left Lola and decided to put his talents to good use by becoming a
prostitute and thus, establishing a solid source of income which would allow
him, in time, to put serious efforts into his personal development and break
from this vicious circle.

## By mistake

Joseph was a defective person. He stood alone in front of the mirror in his
room dressed in his best garment and practiced vowels.

“Aaaaa, ooooo…”

The vowels would come out of his mouth strangled, hissing, unnatural, as if
from a very long and narrow plastic tube.

“Now look at yourself Joseph,” he thought, “you were saving money for a year
to buy this suit and you have been practicing the vowels for as long, and
still they do not sound right.”

Joseph would cry a little, but after that he would always return to his
exercises.

“Aaaaa, ooooo, eeeee…”

After a while Joseph's face would turn red and he would start breathing
heavily, like a dog, until finally he'd be forced to stop. The exercises
continued for days and days.

Finally, the vowels started to sound more fully and clearly. Joseph then
switched to tongue twisters and reading books aloud.

“Siks sisk hisk nick siks slisk brisk with pisks and stisks…”

After repeating a line several times Joseph would again get too excited, and
so, he would have to take a few deep breaths. Nevertheless, he persevered.

Finally, words started to sound clear and loud. Joseph made sure that his
suit was immaculate, his breath was fresh, and the color of his face was not
too red. He then went out and joined a gathering of people who all spoke
very beautifully and had very nice clothes on them. By mistake they talked
to Joseph, by mistake they allowed him a glimpse into their lives. They did
not know that Joseph was not a real person, but a defective one.

Suddenly, in the middle of the conversation, while Joseph was talking very
actively and eloquently, there was a loud dull clap. Immediately, the blood
gushed from Joseph's throat and red stains covered everyone who gathered
around him. Joseph started to collapse with a loud and hollow hissing sound
much like a pierced air balloon. Gradually, virtually all blood from his
body was sprayed on his interlocutors while his skin ended up laying on the
floor mingled with his until-recently-wonderful suit.

The people around looked angry and disappointed. But what could they do to
Joseph? Obviously, he was completely defective, but he was also thoroughly
dead.
