---
title: Fibleths of Bobel
type: Short story
date:
  started: March 20, 2020
  finished: October 26, 2020
---

```toc
```

## 1

It seemed that Sam's colleagues from his previous job never understood how
he felt. Apparently, they thought that their jokes were funny, or at least
innocent. For example, it was well known that Sam was allergic to flowers.
When he came to the office for the first time, he announced it himself. “Hi,
everyone! My name is Sam Rageworth and I'm allergic to flowers.” At the time
nobody seemed to have noticed this important fact. Only later Sam discovered
that his colleagues not only took note of his deficiency, but also found it
funny to remind him that they were perfectly healthy. When spring came, one
particularly obnoxious guy (who Sam had never liked before) said quite
frankly, “What nice weather, and the flowers smell so lovely!” When Sam
heard this, he could not believe his ears. Most certainly, it was a direct
attack. If only Sam were just a little bit less careful and a little bit
braver, he would go straight to the flowers guy and hit him with the table
lamp.

Enough is enough. Now Sam joined a company that was well-known for its
hatred-free, welcoming culture. The company was called Bobel.

“Hi, everyone! My name is Sam Rageworth and I'm allergic to flowers,” said
Sam when he entered the new office.

“Hi, and welcome to Bobel, goblaund Sam! Your filthup is noted!” said Eric
smiling in a friendly way. The words “goblaund” and “filthup” were new to
Sam and he felt slightly confused. However, he decided that he should not
start his first day at the new place with silly questions, questions that
some people might find inappropriate.

“Hello, Mr Landberk, it's nice to meet you!” said Sam and extended his hand
for a handshake.

Eric flinched and his face became less friendly. “Goblaund Rageworth, I
understand that you're a boblick, so you can be excused for now. However,
from now on, each day you should learn how to behave respectfully, in a way
that is acceptable to everyone,” said Eric and put his hand on a rubber
club, which happened, for some reason, to be attached to his belt.

“But, of course! That's what I've always expected from people around me,”
replied Sam trying to ignore the weapon.

“Bobel. Here is the list of basic pure words to get you started,” said Eric
and inserted a list of paper into Sam's hand.

**Basic pure words**

The usual punishment is twenty strokes. The number of strokes may vary in
some cases.

* *Bobel* is a word with a variety of meanings and deep philosophical
  connotations. Simplified, its meaning is equivalent to the word “good,”
  which itself needs to be generally avoided. *Bobel* also can be used as an
  indication of agreement.

* *Gogs* means everything unpleasant, oppressive, bad. It is the opposite of
  *bobel*.

* *Goblaund* stands for “mister.” The word “mister” is an unaccented variant
  of “master,” attested since the fifteenth century. Both words are
  connected to inequality and slavery, and so are highly offensive.

* *Boblick* is a person who is new to the company. If such a person were
  called “newcomer” or some such, they could be offended by the distinction,
  because they would not be called the same as everyone else.

* *Filthup* means anything that people would like to ban from conversations.

* *Fibleth* means “a person of high rank in the company.” Since high ranking
  staff is so important, it is imperative that they are addressed using a
  neutral word. *Fibleth* also means “handicapped person.”

* The abbreviation CEO should never be used because it contains three
  forbidden words at once. “Chief” (denotes inequality), “executive”
  (reminds us of executions), and “officer” (denotes inequality and has a
  military connotation). Say *feeble fibleth* for CEO. The title is modest
  and pleasant to the feeble fibleth. In other contexts, the word “feeble”
  is not to be used, because it is derogatory. The punishment is hundred
  strokes.

Sam finished reading and looked at Eric, who apparently was waiting to
evaluate Sam's reaction. Sam looked back at the paper and again at Eric.
“But, what does it mean twenty strokes, hundred strokes? What are you…
beating people here?”

“Look, boblick Rageworth. Have you ever been offended?” asked Eric sternly.

“Yes, so many times in my life!” confessed Sam.

“If so, did you ever want the offenders to be punished properly, without
delay?”

“Yes, I guess so,” answered Sam, remembering how he once wanted to utilize
his table lamp.

“That's exactly what we do. You see, mutual respect can be sustained through
various means. But when everything fails and a crime is committed, it is
important to show that our system is not gogs, not gibbershibberish, it is
always ready to react bobelly.”

“I see,” said Sam.

“Bobel,” concluded Eric and the friendly smile returned to his otherwise
intelligent face.

## 2

For a while, Sam was too excited to start working. Instead, he looked around
and observed his new colleagues. At first, there was nothing unusual about
them, but soon Sam noticed that they were much more concentrated and
disciplined than the people at his previous job. The new colleagues talked
rarely, and when they did the meaning of these exchanges eluded Sam, for the
phrases often involved words outside of the little dictionary that Eric had
provided.

Sam realized just how considerate these people must be. After all, they
learned this entire new language to avoid hurting each other. He remembered
that Eric said “your filthup is noted,” and “filthup,” according to the
dictionary, was “anything that people want to ban from conversations.” That
meant that perhaps, not immediately, but eventually, after many petitions,
Sam could succeed in banning the word “flowers” from all conversations. He
imagined the flowers guy from his previous job trying to make his joke at
Bobel, and how upon hearing it Eric takes out his big black rubber club and
immediately knocks him down. “This place is something special,” thought Sam.

Nevertheless, Sam wanted to socialize, so he decided to wait till lunch,
when, he assumed, a livelier conversation might develop. Indeed, in a way,
that's what happened. Curiously though, from twelve people at the table only
three or four would actually speak, everyone else just listened. Sam decided
to listen too, but soon he lost any hope of understanding the conversation.
The speakers had very impressive vocabularies and they only used
prepositions, pronouns, and other auxiliary words from normal English.

Eric looked as if he managed to attend a show by his favorite rock band for
the first time. He glanced at Sam, winked, and whispered in awe
“Bobel-lang!” At that moment someone apparently made a joke, which Sam
missed. He was sure that he wouldn't understand the joke anyway. Still,
everyone laughed and Sam laughed as well. It would be mildly offensive to
sit there not laughing.

After lunch, Sam approached Eric and asked timidly, “How can I improve my
Bobel-lang? I'm having a bit of difficulty following the conversations
here.”

“Go to the room 1403B and get yourself a copy of the book of filth. All the
filthups and all the pure words are collected there.”

“Excellent!” exclaimed Sam.

Eric put his hand at Sam's shoulder and said quietly but menacingly, “It is
not excellent, it is Bobel.”

“Bobel,” answered Sam. Eric patted him on the shoulder and moved on.

## 3

It wasn't straightforward, but Sam found the room 1403B. He knocked on the
door.

“Uckcraft,” was the answer.

Sam was confused. Not knowing what “uckcraft” meant, he could not decide
whether he was invited to enter or denied entrance. Sam also did not know
the correct way to ask for clarification without offending the person on the
other side of the door even before they saw each other.

“Can I enter?” asked Sam in desperation.

“Ah, a boblick! You can enter,” replied the voice.

Sam entered a small room where many copies of the same book were shoved
everywhere.

“My name is Greg. For now, I will speak the relaxed Bobel-lang, very close
to the language you're used to.”

“Thank you!” said Sam, relieved. “I was told that you have a copy of the
book of filth…”

“Of course! It's gonna be a bit hard here without one, haha!” said Greg and
winked. He took one of the books and handed it to Sam. “There are just a few
things to note about the book. The printed version always lags behind the
online version, so I'd recommend reading the online version to be up to
date.”

“Is it updated very frequently?”

“Every day we add from ten to twenty filthups,” answered Greg proudly. “But
updating filthups is not the hardest part. The challenge is to keep our
language *pure*. Removing all contamination from the language is truly a
very hard challenge.”

“Contamination?”

“Yes! Most English words are contaminated because they have some undesirable
connotations attached to them, so that in certain situations for certain
people those words may be *painfully* offensive,” Greg pronounced the word
“painfully” like it indeed caused him pain. “So, we invent completely new
words that suffer from no such associations, those words are pure. By
gradually replacing contaminated words by their pure analogues, we make our
language as a whole less offensive.”

“This is ingenious!”

“Quite so. But even though we work very hard, it is an uphill battle. It is
a battle of divine against human nature.”

“I don't understand.”

“There are only so many reasonably short words a speaker of English can
comfortably pronounce. As we explore this space, we deplete it. At the same
time, another force is at work. The existing pure words become
contaminated.”

“But how can this be?” exclaimed Sam.

“I'll give you an example. We had a pure word for handicapped people,
‘fardit.’ Nothing wrong with it, whatsoever. It was created with care. Of
course, no one would dare to abuse this word inside the company, but
outside, certain people started to use it as a derogatory nickname. We still
do not know who started it. Long story short, we had to replace the word.
But this time we had to be clever about it to prevent this scenario from
repeating. To achieve that, we decided to combine the negative meaning with
something positive. This is how the word ‘fibleth’ came to also mean
‘handicapped.’”

“I admire your inventiveness!”

“Yes, the challenges that we face require a lot of creativity. It is enough
for a particular root to become contaminated and other words that happen to
use the same root, even merely phonetically, become contaminated too. This
is just how the human brain works.”

“How many entries are there in the book as of now?” asked Sam.

“About five thousand.”

“It is probably quite hard to avoid five thousand filthups in everyday
conversations,” noted Sam.

“Yes, it is. It takes effort to be respectful to your colleagues.”

“Is there some trick to make it work?”

“There is one. Many people use it here. When you are not sure, just say
‘Bobel,’ which means ‘good’ and in general is considered the most neutral
and appropriate response in every situation. If you don't understand what
others say you can also just reply ‘Bobel’ to avoid an unpleasant scene.”

“Bobel, thank you!” replied Sam. He was happy to learn such a useful life
hack.

“Bobel,” echoed Greg and returned to his work.

## 4

Eric kept Sam busy for the rest of the day and it wasn't until late evening
that Sam got an opportunity to open the book of filth. Sam wanted to get up
to speed with the vocabulary and feel more at ease with his new colleagues.
Thus, he decided to spend an hour every evening working through the book.

There were two big sections: one for filthups and another one for the
dictionary of pure words. Both sections were organized alphabetically. Sam
decided to start from the very beginning.

**A**

Abrasive saw

Added: Thursday, 2 April 2020

Use instead: noddledew

Sam was a little surprised to find such specific technical terms in the
book. Just to make sure he checked the book cover, it read, “The book of
filth: all filthups and pure words, Bobel Inc.” “Sounds about right,”
thought Sam and returned to reading.

**Explanation from the applicant:**

*I will remember forever the sunny day of 23rd July 1992. The morning air
was fresh and the blue sky invited us to explore the world. For two weeks
now I had been debating with R. whether or not dad's abrasive saw could cut
through the rocks. Today we were determined to find out empirically. My dad
would kill me if I asked to take his saw, so we decided to take it secretly
and try it just a little bit on one rock. As soon as it was established that
the saw could indeed cut through it, we would bring it back and nobody would
notice.*

*Since the abrasive saw is very heavy, we had to transport and hold it
together with R. Finally, we reached the rock. I was holding the saw with
both my hands from behind and R. was holding it from his side. I started the
saw. As soon as we brought it in contact with the rock, it slipped and cut
R.'s leg. R started screaming like mad and I turned the saw off a few
seconds later. He got his leg amputated a day later in the hospital.*

*I've spent most of my life and a substantial amount of money trying to cope
with this psychological trauma. I'd appreciate if people did not mention
abrasive saws in my presence.*

“Wow,” thought Sam. His own problem with flowers seemed so petty now. In
this manner Sam soon learned to abandon many other words starting with A:
addiction, adolescence, agglutination… Finally, he skipped to F and checked
if there was an entry about flowers. There was! Flowers were banned a long
time ago, but not because of allergies. At one point at Bobel, in its early
romantic era, many were into calling women “flowers.” Female employees
eventually protested against it, because they found the name uncomfortable,
and so it was banned for good.

Sam leafed through the book and the frightening reality of the world around
him became more vivid than ever. So many broken lives, so much pain. Sam did
his best to memorize each case so that he could avoid using the banned
words. Then he worked through the dictionary trying to remember the most
common pure words. He wanted to say at least one phrase in good Bobel-lang
tomorrow and thus, deserve the respect of Eric and others.

## 5

The next day during lunch Sam came with the book of filth and tried his best
to follow the conversation. This time more words were familiar, but he
noticed that knowing the words was not enough. There were all sorts of
idioms that were not documented in the book. Sam concluded that a specific
sub-culture must have evolved over time at Bobel and learning its ways would
take more time and effort than he had imagined.

Finally, Sam understood the meaning of the phrase “Goblaund gogs irmooned
persh t' this dotta.” Apparently, that was a good joke, because everyone
laughed. Sam roughly translated it as “Mister ‘bad’ disclosed his
infatuation towards this woman.”

Sam decided to ask if the woman was beautiful. So he said, “Was the dotta
bobel?” As soon as he finished this phrase everyone went silent. People at
the table were looking at each other as if they had swallowed something
repulsive.

Ten seconds later two men dressed in something resembling military uniform
appeared. They took Sam firmly by the hands, thus forming a sort of rigid
construction, and escorted him into a small room without windows. In the
room Sam was stripped of his possessions, including his copy of the book of
filth, and left alone.

Sam understood that he had said something wrong. He decided that he should
ask for forgiveness, particularly stressing the fact that he was a boblick,
and a very stupid one at that. If this wouldn't be enough, Sam was prepared
to stand on his knees and put on a little theatrical performance.

## 6

After ten minutes, a man dressed in an elegant gray uniform appeared. He
brought with him a long and narrow case.

“Bobel-lang is hard,” said the man with the intonation that could as well
mean “too bad they didn't have the apple cake today.”

“My name is Leonard Emanuel Surperio, but you can call me fibleth Leo.”

“Nice to meet you, fibleth Leo,” said Sam.

Leo walked back and forth reflecting on something for a minute. Then he said
“So… tell me, Sam, do you regard dottas as objects?”

“No, of course not!” replied Sam.

“Then why did you have to ask whether that dotta was any good? When I heard
this, it terrified me.” Leo paused and stared for a couple of seconds right
into Sam's eyes. “You have a callous soul, Sam,” he added as if looking at
Sam confirmed his worst suspicions. “But do not worry, we will try to fix
that.”

Leo opened his case and took out a long metallic rod. On the rod there were
little sharp hooks and razors.

“I thought it would be a rubber club,” said Sam, who now understood where
this was going.

“Oh no, those are for the categories A and B. This is the category D. We
have to use special tools for this one. Your punishment is a hundred strokes
as inflicted by this wondrous device.” Leo paused. “It's called
Bobel-blast…” he added meditatively as he admired his weapon.

“I'm a boblick, spare me!” exclaimed Sam and stood on his knees.

“It's all too fragile, Sam! People's feelings!” suddenly screamed Leo
furiously. “You should've been careful with your words.”

“I did not mean to ever offend anyone!” cried Sam. His head touched the
floor.

“Who cares? It is not you who assign meaning to your words, it is the people
around you. And we chose to assign this meaning,” said Leo. “Hundred strokes
will probably kill you if I do them all at once. We are sensible people, so
I'll do ten per day for ten days. By the end of this period, you will arrive
at a new understanding of the situation. I'm gonna ask about your thoughts
regarding the procedure every day and you must answer in proper and
respectful Bobel-lang. I'll judge your replies and if I'm still
uncomfortable with them I may extend your punishment.”

And so, the torture began. At the end of each session, Sam was wise enough
to say just one word “bobel” which usually satisfied Leo. By the third day
though Sam had lost so much blood that he found it difficult to speak. Sam
wanted to say “bobel.” He knew that it was the right answer and all other
phrases would only bring him more troubles. He did not want problems. He
wanted to conform in the best way possible. Yet he was so weak that even
saying the single word was too hard. The word shined in his head as an image
of something holy, something that would surely save him from further
beating. In his deluded brain, he tried to reach the word, to catch the
glowing image, to pronounce it like a spell, an all-healing incantation, but
no matter how hard he tried the word “bobel” would not come out of his
mouth.

Leo waited. He wanted his answer. When he saw that no answer was going to
follow, he said “too gogs” and finished Sam off mercifully by cutting his
throat with a special ceremonial knife. Shortly after that Leo made a phone
call. In a few minutes, two cleaners and a woman in a similar gray uniform
appeared. Leo looked her in the eyes for a moment. Suddenly, he changed, as
if a spell were broken. He hugged the woman like a scared child hugs his
mother and whispered in her ear “Asked if the dotta was bobel…” The emotions
came out at last, for they could be suppressed no longer. Leo cried. His
tears were like waters of a wild river that emerges from icy mountain peaks
despite all the difficulties. The tears were pure.
