---
title: How will it be?
type: Literary short story
date:
  started: June 29, 2020
  finished: February 22, 2021
---

The window must be cleaned. In particular, the windowsill deserves close
attention. It's been over a year since a rag has touched this area of the
house and who knows how much dirt has accumulated there. Cleaning a window
was not an issue five years ago, when Nina Georgievna was eighty. At the
time she could still see contours of objects relatively well. Indeed, she
could clean two windows in the same day. But five years have passed. Nina
Georgievna's eyesight has worsened considerably, especially during the last
winter. The doctors diagnosed cataracts and recommended surgery. Even two
surgeries, in fact, because there are two eyes. Nina Georgievna's daughter,
Katia, helped with money and the doctors did their best. But either because
the condition was already so grave, or just because the operations could
have been done better, Nina Georgievna's eyesight did not improve, but
worsened. Even so, she regretted not so much the deterioration of her health
but the money spent. “I only wasted Katia's money!” she would say.

The flat should stay clean. It is shameful to have a dirty flat, even if
nobody visits you. In a way, the physical tidiness connects to the moral
notion of being a good person. A good person cannot live in an unkempt
apartment. Lately though, Nina Georgievna has started to become lazier due
to her health problems and old age. Now cleaning is something the old woman
performs partly out of habit, but mostly because it is “an activity.” To
clean one has to move, and to move means to live. The obligation to keep the
flat clean is both a nuisance the babushka grumbles about from time to time
and a vital stimulus. When one's whole life has been spent working, caring,
and worrying about others, can it be different now? Katia said once, “Mom,
you have to enjoy your life!” to which Nina Georgievna answered “Enjoyment?
Don't talk nonsense.”

Outside the window, there is a warm September day. One of those days that
admit that summer has ended but, as a consolation prize, give you the warm
light that cannot burn and cannot blind. This light falls softly and gently,
even meekly. The frail sibling of the white summer light seems to exist only
to enhance the ambience of the melancholic autumn season when even people
who are normally not inclined to think about the passage of time tilt their
heads ever so slightly while sitting on their balconies and something akin
to a hint of nostalgia creeps in their eyes. Nostalgia for what? For the
summer that is to return again but never in the same form? For the loving
hand that once was so close, warm, kind and kindred? The hand that wasn't
going away, but it did.

The light and the nostalgia are invited. They come through the window frame,
through the stalks and the leaves of the plants on the windowsill. Not
diminished but enhanced, the light reaches Nina Georgievna's eyes and melts
there on her depleted retinas forming smooth shapes that grade into each
other and that layer on top of one another and that are of no help. The
blurry contours suggest positions of things, evoke memories, direct
movements, often mislead. On top of this, there is a formation of fixed
specks and lines that always follow eye movements slowly and fastidiously as
if floating in water.

One by one the plants are moved from the windowsill to the table. Now the
window radiates light openly, but the autumn light is shy. Outside, the
clouds pass before the sun and the light grows weaker and stronger,
undulates, plays hide and seek with the people below. It is so silent today.

How to tell if something is clean if you cannot see? Over time Nina
Georgievna has adopted a sort of circular probing motion of hand that serves
detection of dirt, or rather detection of any deviation from smoothness. A
defect found in this way provokes astonishment, a frown, scrutiny, and
finally calls for all sorts of wiping and cleaning efforts that are applied
assiduously and with remarkable vigor. But despite all the dedication of
Nina Georgievna the defiant world of the visual remains mostly unconquered.
Many times when the desired degree of smoothness is achieved, scratches and
stains are achieved as well, making the surfaces and objects look even worse
than before cleaning.

In the meantime, the frame and the windowsill have been groped, washed, and
wiped. It is time to move the plants back. The first and the second pot fly
to their positions without problems, but the third pot touches a plant, tugs
it, and the plant ends up on the floor. This is an unforeseen deviation from
the original plan. Nina Georgievna feels with her feet that she is walking
on soil now. Exactly at this moment, when she happens to be so vulnerable
and busy estimating the extent of the disaster, her neighbor Alevtina
Fedorovna comes to pay a visit. She is younger, being only sixty years old,
and is entrusted with the mission of helping Nina Georgievna for a small
remuneration from Katia. Because of that mission, the neighbor has the keys.

“What is going on here? What is this mess?” Alevtina Fedorovna asks. Her
mouth and eyes widen. “Just look at it! The floor is all covered with soil!
And of course it is for me to clean it now. Thank you very much Nina
Georgievna!”

Nina Georgievna stands silent from guilt like a child who has played an
unfortunate trick. She is ordered to sit still by Alevtina Fedorovna who
indeed cleans the floor and puts all the flowers back on the windowsill. She
then prepares the dinner. The helpful neighbor talks about her son who has a
good job and is about to marry a good girl. He will soon come to visit
Alevtina Fedorovna. And the wedding! Think of it, it is such a happy time.

How will it be when Katia comes? She will come by plane from a different
city. She will come for no other reason but to see Nina Georgievna. She will
come to gift the old woman a morsel of time. Katia will come with a hug. The
kind of hug that is revealed like a birthday present. Katia will come with a
kiss. The one that can fold time. In the apex of the kiss there is a little
oasis that anchors the feeling which is to outlive parting.

&nbsp;

Television is one of the treats that Nina Georgievna still enjoys. These
days there are many channels and many programs: films, talk shows, serials.
Diversity is good, yet most people tend to stick to their favorites. Nina
Georgievna has chosen a series about a detective agency. A few times she
tried to find something different but the effort of diversifying her TV diet
faced a purely technical problem. The series destined to become Nina
Georgievna's personal favorite started to be aired about ten years ago.
Every evening she'd watch the show and as years passed and her eyesight
ebbed, she still could follow new episodes because she knew the way plot
typically developed and recognized every character by voice. With other
content it gradually became impossible: unfamiliar voices and strange
situations would quickly confuse the babushka and she'd sit for minutes
listening to the dialogues without any idea of what would be going on.

Old age appreciates stability and life sometimes provides it. With respect
to the TV series in question the stability has been ample. Every evening TV
viewers can be completely sure of meeting with their favorite detectives,
criminologists, and scientists. In fact, in the rare cases when there are
changes in the program, Nina Georgievna meets them with an audible
indication of displeasure. She considers her evening ruined and has to
employ substitutes, none of which is as good and as familiar as the original
series she waits for.

In the room, there is an ambient gloom. An uninvited tenant, it returns
every night slightly intoxicated. The bright screen of the TV set cuts
through the darkness and the boredom of the evening efficiently and
artificially. The big all-embracing shadow of the night is displaced by the
magical light which, alas, cannot prevail fully. Instead, it gives birth to
lesser and sharper shadows which feigningly obey the action on the screen
and move in perfect coordination with it. The sound is made from bricks.
Familiar intonations, questions countered by answers, hypotheses that lug
fussy action scenes—they all are impregnated with a single production style
and inexorable continuity rimmed by an alternation of five or so musical
themes. The bricks seem to be perfectly arranged, skillfully shuffled, so as
to hide their paucity.

At last, the episode ends and the TV set is turned off. In the sudden
silence, in the contrast between action and emptiness, in the absolute
darkness that finally quenches the light, Nina Georgievna feels a palpable
presence that drains and reduces her. The black press of life that remained
for the whole day in the background now comes to the fore. Long lonely
minutes pass. Nina Georgievna's thoughts flee from the dark empty room and
fall into familiar crevices where they stray in circles. At the end of this
maze there is sleep. Tomorrow will be a new day.
