---
title: The true power of Dvorak
desc: My experience with the Dvorak layout
date:
  published: March 15, 2016
  updated:   June 1, 2017
---

A month and a half has passed from the moment when I switched to the Dvorak
keyboard layout. You can find out a lot of blog posts and descriptions of
how the layout is better than the traditional QWERTY setup
([this](http://infohost.nmt.edu/~shipman/ergo/parkinson.html) is my
favorite). I'm telling you now: it's really better in every way, it's not
just a thing for geeks to show-off as some people say, it's a real
performance and comfort booster.

The first several days is a nightmare. If you type every day, be prepared to
get a significant performance drop. Even one sentence feels like a real
torture, you need to control your hands “manually”—no unconscious magic from
your brain to assist you during this time. I personally just got a glimpse
how much of background work our brain normally does. When I started to learn
Dvorak, I had to type at least a bit every day, and it often gave me
headaches because of the enormous conscious effort that typing required.

After a week I got to the speed of 25–30 wpm (I switched cold turkey and
never attempted using QWERTY once I started with Dvorak). I think getting to
this speed would take longer for most people, but I type a lot and I tried
to type as much as I can during that first week. After one week you can do
some programming. (And yes, I had to re-learn Emacs shortcuts and re-arrange
my [custom modal system](https://github.com/mrkkrp/modalka) a bit because I
decided not to use input-methods but to set Dvorak on OS level.) Basically,
at this stage you're just slow, but Dvorak already feels better.

After a month I got to my previous speed 60 wpm. This was my top speed with
QWERTY—when I really tried to type fast, that's what I got. I thought that I
won't be able to ever beat this personal record. Well, I have to say yes,
*not with QWERTY*. Now, after another 15 days I type 70 wpm and I feel like
I will be able to do 80 and maybe 100 someday[1](footnote:1).

But the main thing about Dvorak is comfort, of course. It just feels so much
better. You know, like proper mechanical keyboard feels better. Like modal
editing feels better than non-modal. Hands move so natural and with
surprising accuracy, text just flows… Now combination of modal editing and
Dvorak has eliminated any discomfort for me even when I use laptop keyboard.
I can type a lot and I cannot reach the point when my hands are tired. Old
weird sensations in my hands have gone. Now I just see how *proper* touch
typing is done.

***

> footnotes

  1. And yes, now in 2017, I do type 80 wpm and I feel I have not reached my
     maximal speed yet.
