---
title: Exposure without giving up artistic control
desc: This article is about getting perfect exposure without giving up any artistic control on modern digital cameras.
date:
  published: January 2, 2020
  updated: September 8, 2021
tag: photography
---

This article is about getting perfect exposure without giving up artistic
control on modern digital cameras. I assume that you already know about the
exposure triangle: aperture, shutter speed, and ISO. I'm not going to
explain what these parameters mean—there are already enough posts and videos
about that. Instead, I will share my approach for setting the three
parameters.

## ISO

I always shoot in the manual mode, but with ISO set to auto. While aperture
and shutter speed often can be used for artistic purposes, ISO value for a
good exposure is something that is easily deducible given the other two
parameters and the amount of light you have. Your camera can set ISO for
you—tweaking it manually is a waste of time. In addition to that, auto ISO
will automatically take care of minor changes in light, e.g. if you're
shooting outdoors.

It is important to understand that we want the lowest ISO possible in all
our shots—ideally it should be always between 100 and 2000. High ISO will
cause your photos to look grainy. We're talking not about that that nice
film grain, but about nasty digital grain which many people find much less
aesthetically pleasing. Few people know that high ISO will also make digital
cameras use lower saturation. This is done to reduce chroma noise. You don't
want that either. High ISO is justified only when you can't improve the
light and the question is “whether or not I get any usable photos at all”?

## Aperture

Aperture is the most important parameter because it contributes directly to
your composition. So it is the first thing to get right. My algorithm is
this:

* **Q: do we work in dim light and/or want to freeze moving subjects**?
  * A: yes. Depending on the light you might prefer widest apertures to keep
    ISO lower. It is a question of finding a compromise between having wide
    enough field of view and low enough ISO. I used to think that one should
    try to keep ISO lower at the expense of field of view, but now I believe
    that the right field of view (hence, the right aperture that matches
    your vision) is the primary concern and the grain is not so important.
  * A: no. **Q: do we want bokeh and/or shallow depth of field** (striking
    separation of in-focus/out-of-focus areas)? This often makes sense only
    when you are close enough to your subject because bokeh also depends on
    the difference in distance between the object in focus and the
    background. Trying to go for bokeh and shallow depth of field when you
    can't really get the effect is pointless.
    * A: yes. Go for wide apertures, perhaps widest, if you want maximum of
      that effect. Also keep it mind that sometimes you want to close your
      aperture just as much as to make your subject in focus fully, not
      partially as it happens with widest apertures. Use preview of depth of
      field on your camera to get this right.
    * A: no. Choose an aperture between f/5.0 and f/9.0. At this aperture
      almost all lenses are sharp and constrasty. Go down if you want to
      increase the depth of field or to compensate for long-exposures, e.g.
      when shooting water in motion. I usually don't go lower than f/10
      since all lenses start to be soft at narrow apertures because of
      diffraction. If I want longer exposures ideally I'll use a tripod and
      an ND filter instead. But I don't have a tripod handy and it's a
      matter of getting a nice shot or nothing at all, I'll go as low as
      necessary.

Most of the time, I find myself shooting either wide open or at something
between f/5.0 andn f/10.0.

## Shutter speed

If you set ISO to auto and figured out aperture, shutter speed is easy:

* **Q: do we want to freeze motion**?
  * A: yes. Set shutter speed fast enough to accomplish what you want.
  * A: no. Adjust your shutter speed till the exposure meter points at 0
    with ISO being set at 100. If you have image stabilization (Canon
    terminology, IS) or vibration reduction (Nikon terminology, VR) you can
    use slower shutter speeds, depending on your focal length and how close
    you are to your subject. If you have a tripod, there is no point
    shooting with anything but ISO 100. Just make shutter speed slow enough
    to accumulate enough light.

## Conclusion

This may look like a lot to keep in mind, but with a bit of practice the
rules become second nature. I find the technical part of photography very
easy with modern equipment. What is harder is to have an artistic vision.
Finally, a good shot in terms of composition and the captured moment (e.g.
light) always should be preferred to a more boring albeit technically
superior one.

Happy shooting!
