---
title: Why paint?
desc: In this post I have written down some of my thoughts about my motivation for painting and doing art in general.
date:
  published: May 1, 2022
tag: painting
---

“Why paint?” is an important question that, I believe, everyone who intends
to paint regularly and seriously must answer for themselves. Once the answer
is given it can provide direction and meaning to the activity; it also helps
to choose subjects for one's paintings.

I believe there are mainly two motivations for painting: the process and the
result. The dichotomy is not new, and indeed is shared by many other
activities. In the case of painting, the process is strictly personal; it is
about meditative concentration and enjoyment obtained through observation,
channeling of visual content through oneself, and expressing it in the
medium of preference. The result, on the other hand, is about calibrating
one's craft, showing what one had in their head to the world and,
occasionally, enjoying the world's reaction.

Both motivations are important, but not in the same way. If we are to
compare them, we will need something more fundamental to gauge them against.
I think this begs the question about the way one wants to live their life.
As lofty and philosophical as it may sound, I think there is no way around
it if we are to be honest with ourselves. As the starting point, let's take
this uncontroversial idea: organize your life in such a way that you
experience interest, satisfaction, and the urge to continue. If you have
these things, it doesn't really get much better than that. Then, if we focus
on the process, it is quite easy to keep oneself engaged and satisfied
through little improvements and personal victories. I argue that it is never
the case with the result. The result is useful for determining the direction
of the next step in order to keep that personal artistic journey
interesting, but otherwise it is always flawed and never quite perfect.

When the emphasis is on the world's reaction, it is indicative of one's
personal vulnerability and the need for validation, which is unlikely to be
fully satisfied through results of one's work anyway. For example, when
someone says that they need to be “different” in order to stand out from the
crowd, it is clear that they are governed by the result (the world's
reaction) rather than the process. This is a morbid and brittle position to
be in. Not only one predicates one's satisfaction and happiness on something
uncertain and, frankly, quite random, one also strays from the organic
process of self-discovery.

I believe that self-discovery is a synonym for life. And as with life you
actually want it to be a long and captivating process. With the healthy
attitude where focus is on the process, there is really no reason to treat
art differently from anything else or make a big thing out of it. Much in
the same way as one needs to breathe and eat, one needs to paint, and
similarly to tasty food or good exercise painting enhances life's depth.

But let's return to the role of the result. If one is practicing their craft
regularly and for a long enough period of time chances are they are heading
towards a plateau of sorts in their abilities and in the way they do their
craft. This is what I would call a personal style, a kind of fingerprint.
I'm convinced that as little as possible should be consciously done to make
one's style distinct and recognizable because it might as well be pushed
away from its natural trajectory. Of course, style is going to be influenced
by all kinds of things, but these things should be what makes the artist who
they are, not artificial concoctions.

This brings me to the topic of subjects and authenticity. I believe that the
world needs more authentic art and that kind of art comes to life when the
artist is not afraid to focus on their lives as they are instead of
reproducing something that is considered beautiful or important by others.
For example, if you like painting nature it is far better to move closer to
the countryside and paint what you see around your location than to use
references found on the internet. The principle is simple: paint what
actually makes up your life and you will find that you appreciate your life
more, while the result is going to be more true and interesting. It is a
win-win situation both in terms of the process and the result.
