---
title: Working with text without pain
desc: Hints how to make your typing experience more pleasant and protect yourself from RSI in the future.
date:
  published: June 7, 2017
---

For some time I wanted to write about how I do typing and text editing in
general. This is because I've noticed that many people I know (mainly
professional software developers) started to complain about pains in hands.
I have to admit that also faced this issue a couple of years ago. Since then
though, I managed to eliminate the problem completely and currently I type
as long and as much as I want and do not experience any pain at all. Here I
describe the combination of hardware/settings/techniques what helped me.

## The keyboard

In 2015 I still was doing all my work using a laptop, so my typing
experience was that of a man who has to use a built-in laptop keyboard. At
that time it did not occur to me that the built-in keyboard is outright
dangerous for health. In retrospect, I can name the following flaws:

* One has to keep hands in an unnatural position—too close to each other. In
  addition to that, the position is not symmetric: while the left hand can
  be kept in more-or-less natural position, the right hand is usually
  shifted to the left because of insufficient distance between the clusters
  for the both hands.

* Pinkies are overloaded and thumbs (the strongest fingers) are only used to
  press the spacebar. One might argue that remapping could be used to
  alleviate the problem, but in my experience it is not true, as the
  important, non-alphabetic keys are all placed in positions that can be
  reached by no other fingers but pinkies. There is nothing in the middle of
  the keyboard that could be comfortably operated by thumbs: only the
  spacebar.

* The keys are staggered so one has to stretch his fingers in weird ways to
  reach keys that are not in the home row. Why do that completely unnatural
  movements? This decreases accuracy too.

* As an Emacs user, I had to use the <kbd>⎈ Ctrl</kbd> key a lot and so I
  followed the popular advice to make <kbd>⇪ Caps Lock</kbd> to function as
  the left <kbd>⎈ Ctrl</kbd>. This looked like a win at first (certainly
  better than the default position of left <kbd>⎈ Ctrl</kbd>). Only later I
  realized that it makes my poor left pinkie do even more work. Also, this
  introduces an additional asymmetry because I did not make my <kbd>↵
  Enter</kbd> to function as the right <kbd>⎈ Ctrl</kbd>. So I quickly
  started to use the <kbd>⇪ Caps Lock</kbd> whenever I needed a <kbd>⎈
  Ctrl</kbd>: left or right.

It did not take long before strange sensations in my left pinkie started to
undermine my productivity as a keyboard user. My posture wasn't quite
straight too because of all those asymmetries.

When I realized that I may lose my ability to type as efficiently as I used
to, I started to look for a better keyboard. From the previous points it
follows that “a better keyboard” should:

* Be either split or have enough space between the clusters for left and
  right hand, so a straight, natural posture could be maintained without
  effort.

* Should have some keys that could be operated by thumbs to unload pinkies.

* Should have straight layout of keys so they form a “matrix”.

* Should have all modifier keys (<kbd>⇧ Shift</kbd>, <kbd>⎈ Ctrl</kbd>, and
  <kbd>⎇ Alt</kbd>) in symmetric positions for each hand, to eliminate
  excessive work load for fingers of one particular hand.

* It should be mechanical, since it just feels better and hopefully, lasts
  longer.

To solve the problem once and for all, I decided that I'd buy a keyboard
that satisfies those criteria no matter the price. So here it is, my first
**Kinesis Advantage**:

```
```

At the time I bought it they did not come up with the later model, **Kinesis
Advantage 2 QD** ([hi-res image](https://www.kinesis-ergo.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/kb600qd-oh-1977x1024.png)):

![Kinesis Advantage 2 QD](/static/img/kinesis-advantage-2-qd.png)

I bought this one too as soon as it become available. The “QD” part in the
name tells us that this is a version with dual-legended QWERTY/Dvorak key
caps, I'll tell how I switched to Dvorak later in the post.

This keyboard, being sold for $369, satisfies all my requirements. All the
keys are mechanical, including those smaller function keys. In addition to
that it's fully programmable, with bells and whistles, stores all
configuration in its own memory, works nicely out-of-the-box on Linux (and
can be reprogrammed without any additional software that usually requires
access to a Windows machine with other keyboards).

Being a professional software developer, spending $369 for a thing as vital
as keyboard is absolutely justified. These keyboards are known to work
without any issues for 10 years straight, so it's a nice investment too.

## The chair

## Keyboard layout

## Modal editing

## Sequences of keys vs chords

## Sticky keys

## Editor

## Conclusion

Applying all these recommendations in practice does take will power and may
be inconvenient at first. Nevertheless I'm quite convinced that it's this
combination of hardware and settings allows me to be an efficient keyboard
user and avoid any discomfort now and later.
